BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

Module 1: Study Guide Questions 
Answers 

1. Cancers and cancer cells arise through changes that provide them growth advantages 
over normal cells.  Most generally, these changes result in a breakdown in the proper 
regulation of cellular proliferation.  These rapidly proliferating cells give rise to clonal colonies or 
tumors from a single cell.  Cancer is a significant health issue because two in five (40%) of 
Americans (i.e. people you know) will develop cancer, and one in five (20%) will die from 
cancer. 

2.  Cancers have been, and generally still are classified histologically (stained microscope 
images) in two levels.  The first system includes benign, malignant and metastatic.  The second, 
parallel system is by apparent tissue/cell type of origin.  Most generally, cancers are classified 
as epithelial (carcinomas, from tissues organized as a layer of cells) and non epithelial 
(sarcomas, etc.), with some, like melanomas fitting into neither of these categories. 

3. The progression in cancer development can be observed in the series of changes in 
cervical cancer (and colon cancer) in cellular and tumor morphology.  Second, the 
incidence of most cancers, in particular carcinomas, increases exponentially with age 
indicative of the multiple changes required. 

4. Epidemiologic studies have indicated that environment and lifestyle (geographic location), 
not hereditary origin, correlates with the frequency of the types of cancers a population 
develops (see lecture 2 slides, Figure 20-20 p. 1224 MBoC; Scientific American Article).  For 
example, Japanese that emigrate to the U.S. take on the cancer types most frequently 
developed in the populations of their new location (decrease stomach cancers, increase 
prostate, colon, breast cancers).  The factors include food, occupation, air, habits (like 
smoking), and customs.  They are generally classified as 1. chemical (cigarette smoke, coal 
tar), 2. physical (x-rays, UV light), and 3. lifestyle (women having children or not).  Based on this 
data it has been estimated that 80-90% of cancers are “avoidable.”  It also indicates that 
cancers are the result of factors and agents external to our bodies and cells.  Unfortunately, it 
has proven difficult to determine exactly what to avoid to protect ourselves from cancer.  On 
the bright side, this data also indicates that our cells and bodies contain substantial protective 
mechanisms. 

5.  The age-adjusted death rates from many of the most prevalent cancers have remained 
level or increased.  In addition, much of the improvements that have been seen are due to 
early detection and prevention.  Prior to 1975 we possessed no real understanding of the 
molecular and cellular basis of cancer.  Most of the anticancer  treatments employed today 
are based on the pre-1975 understanding of cancer and target their rapid proliferation.  Many 
new anticancer strategies are being developed based on the much more detailed 
understanding of the changes that occur in cancer cells that provide vulnerabilities that can 
be exploited to kill the cancer cell and leave the normal cells unharmed.  Success through this 

Page 1 of 4 

BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

approach requires accurate, specific identification of the changes in a particular cancer 
through ‘omics.  Gleevic is a prime example of a small molecule drug developed to 
specifically inhibit the protein gene product that is responsible for cancer development.  
Gleevic has been shown to kill CML leukemia cells without harming normal blood cells.  
Unfortunately, CML leukemia cells develop resistance to Gleevic at a rate of around 5% per 
year.  The new and improved approach will be to hit the cancer cells with two or three 
anticancer drugs targeting different cancer-causing proteins simultaneously, since it is highly 
unlikely that a cell will acquire multiple changes leading to drug resistance simultaneously. 

6. Structure-activity relationship studies start with a compound (a drug) with a known inhibitory 
activity or pharmacological activity and a known “active area” or structure required for its 
activity. In these studies researchers modify the chemical structure by adding, taking away or 
modifying functional groups, then test the activity of the new compound.  Paul Ehrlich 
originally developed this approach while he was searching for the “magic bullet” drug that 
would cure syphilis with minimal side effects for the patient. 

7. Computer modeling or “in silico” studies are being used to design new drugs that fit within 
the computer modeled active site (based on x-ray crystallography data) of the oncoprotein 
enzyme being targeted.  The second, more empirical approach is combinatorial chemistry 
where large libraries consisting of 1000s, sometime millions of molecules, with slight functional 
group differences are tested for their ability to inhibit the target oncoprotein enzymes with high 
throughput assays and screening. 

8.  Anticancer drugs should be low molecular weight and relatively easy to synthesize.  This 
allows them to more easily enter tumors and cancer cells and reduces the manufacturing 
costs.  The targets of these drugs should be “druggable”.  This means they are generally 
proteins with an enzymatic function that is crucial for cancer development (Ras GTPase active 
site is not a good target).  Enzyme active sites usually are defined clefts that the drug can be 
designed to fit into and bind tightly.  Tyrosine kinases like Abl (in Bcr-Abl) have turned out to be 
“druggable.”  Pro-proliferation signal receptor hormone binding sites have also proven to be 
“druggable.” 

9.  The main steps to analyzing anti-cancer drugs are as follows: 

a.  target enzyme activity inhibition assays; 

b.  testing the effectiveness and specificity of inhibiting cancer cell growth (or even better 
killing them) in cell culture (can do this in “nude” mice with human tumors and a cancers, as 
well); 

c.  measuring the pharmacodynamics (how well the drug is kept at the right concentration) 
and the side effects of the drug in humans (sometimes there is testing first in model animals like 
mice, but only if they are a good model for the human cancer); 

d.  phase I studies in humans for testing the toxicity of the drug for patients versus the 
effectiveness in reducing the growth of the cancer; 

Page 2 of 4 

BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

e.  phase II and III (sometime IV) studies comparing the new drug to currently used treatments 
in effectiveness to increase patient survival rate and time. 

10.  Iressa is a drug developed through the cutting edge approaches described in the answers 
to questions 6 through 9.  Iressa is very effective in greatly reducing a proportion of non-small-
cell lung cancers in patients.  Unfortunately, as is seen with Gleevec and CML cells, after 
months to years of treatment with Iressa a percentage of the cancers become resistant to the 
drug.  In addition, drugs like Iressa and Gleevec are only effective against those cancers that 
have “oncogene addictions” – dependent on a single oncoprotein for proliferation and 
survival. 

11.  Each of you will have your own answer to this question.  Personally, I do not think most 
cancers will be “curable”, but I do think they will be controllable.  Just as HIV-1 infections are 
now controllable.  We have just begun to develop drugs, antibodies, and other anticancer 
treatments based on our newly acquired knowledge of cancer cell molecular biology.  The 
sequence and annotation of the human genome indicates there are nearly 300 gene 
products causally related to cancer. Many of these should be “druggable”, so there is 
potential for development of many more anticancer drugs.  Multi-drug therapies may greatly 
reduce the development of drug resistant cancers.  The new “-omics” tools for detailed 
analysis of each individual cancer should allow very fine-tuned anticancer treatments.  Over 
the past decades promising potential cures have fooled me, but also stunning success stories 
have pleasantly surprised me.  Clearly, there is much more to learn about the causes of 
cancer and many more approaches to cancer treatment to try.  I do not expect cancer 
researchers to be out of a job within my lifetime.  

12.  The four main classifications of cellular chemical components or macromolecules are 
proteins, lipids, saccharides and nucleic acids.  These four main types of macromolecules are 
built from building blocks; amino acids, fatty acids, mono saccharides (sugars) and 
nucleotides, respectively.  These compounds are the building blocks of proteins, lipids (fats, 
phospholipids, etc.), polysaccharides (and oligosaccharides) and nucleic acids (DNA, RNA), 
respectively. 

13. Cells are made up primarily of C, N, O, and H (96.5% of dry weight), followed by Ca, P, K, 
and S (another 1.5%).  This is highly skewed from the composition of the earth’s crust (see the 
figure from Alberts et al. in the slides).  Cells are 70% water, 29% organic compounds (99% of 
dry weight), and 1% inorganic compounds.  Two key parameters or characteristics that 
determine the properties of these elements are valence and electronegativity.  The properties 
determined are the number and types of bonds formed.  All of these elements are small, have 
outer shells that are about half full or more, the valence electrons are in the first, second or 
third shell, and have similar enough electronegativity to form covalent bonds rather than ionic 
bonds.  The electronegativity of C, H, O, N, P and S varies enough to form either polar or 
nonpolar covalent bonds.  O and N are sufficiently electronegative that they form polar 
covalent bonds with C, H, P.  C, H and S form non polar bonds with each other.  P is generally 
only found as phosphate (PO4) containing polar covalent bonds with O. 

Page 3 of 4 

BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

14.  Water.  Water’s key properties are its dipolarity and the resulting propensity to form 
hydrogen bonds (H-bonds).  Water can form up to four hydrogen bonds with other water 
molecules and other polar molecules.  Water also has the ability to ionize, forming acid 
(hydronium, + charged) and base (hydroxyl, - charged) forms (amphoteric). 

15.  Water forms H-bonds with other polar molecules.  The tendency to H-bond with up to four 
other water molecules gives water a high surface tension, specific heat, and boiling point so it 
is a liquid a room temperature.  In addition, water is a good solvent for polar molecules. 

16.  Carbon is a small element with relatively low electronegativity. Carbon forms four covalent 
bonds that can be single, double, and triple bonds.  Single bonds are tetrahedral and free 
rotation occurs about these bonds.  Double and triple bonds are planer and rotation about 
these bonds is greatly restricted.  Carbon forms polymers that are stable, but not too stable.  
These polymers are not too reactive with water, but reactive enough.  Carbon can form 
branched polymers for forming functional groups.  Carbon can form rings and molecules with 
resonance (alternating double and single bonds).   

17. The relative electronegativity of the four predominant elements in cells is as follows: O > N > 
C > H.  The more electronegative atoms (O, N), when covalently bonded to the less 
electronegative atoms (C, H), form polar bonds and groups due to the uneven sharing of 
electrons.  Covalent bonds between the two more equally electronegative atoms (C, H) forms 
groups that are not polar (nonpolar) due to even sharing of electrons.   

18. The diagram that does not represent a functional group that forms an organic acid and 
base is mod1_Q18_C.png 

19.  Once established in ancient cells, the themes and patterns of macromolecular 
construction and the extraction of energy have been highly conserved. While some adaptive 
pathways and intracellular communication networks have been added in the process of 
cellular evolution, apparently there was little need to develop new classes of compounds.  
Some things can be explained and predicted by the selection for best function, but some 
things are chosen by history (natural) and lack of a strong selection against their continued 
use. 

Page 4 of 4 

