BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

Module 1: Study Guide Questions 

1. Provide a very general description of cancer and cancer cells. 

2. How are cancers typically classified? 

3. Describe some of the evidence supporting the idea that cancers arise from a single cell that 
has gone through a progression of changes. 

4. What evidence supports the idea that most cancers (80-90%) appear to be avoidable? 
Include a description of the factors that determine the frequency of the types of cancer 
people contract and how these factors are classified. 

5. What is the current state of cancer treatment and are we close to a cure?  What does the 
relatively new anticancer drug Gleevic represent for how cancer treatment is changing with 
the advent of a more detailed understanding of the changes occurring during cancer cell 
development? 

6.  Describe the general process of structure-activity relationship studies in drug design.  Who 
developed this approach and why? 

7.  What are two new approaches to developing drugs that reduced the cost significantly? 

8.  What are key aspects of anti-cancer drugs and their targets? 

9.  Describe the main steps and approaches in the analysis of potential anti-cancer drugs. 

10.  Iressa is a drug with a high affinity for the EGF-R kinase active site.  How do the results of 
treatment of cancer patients both provide hope and concern for the prospects of curing 
cancer soon? 

11.  How would you characterize the prospects for finding a cure for cancer in the near 
future? 

12. What are the four main classifications of the cellular chemical components? What types of 
macromolecules do these components serve as the building blocks for? 

13. What are the primary atoms and types of compounds that make up cells? 

14. What is the most abundant molecule in a living cell? What are the key properties of this 
molecule? 

15. What is the primary type of chemical interaction it enters into with other polar molecules? 
How is the tendency of this molecule to enter into the same type of interaction with others of 
the same molecule important for the existence of life? 

16. What makes carbon outstanding among all of the chemical elements? What are the types 
of chemical bonds carbon can form and how do they affect molecular structure? 

Page 1 of 2 

BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

17. How do C, H, O, and N differ with regard to electronegativity? How does this affect the 
properties of the bonds and functional groups they form? 

18. Which of the three diagrams does not represent a functional group that forms an organic 
acid and base? 

19. An almost infinite number of organic molecules are possible, but cells contain only a very 
few types of small organic molecules, a subset of which are used as building blocks to 
generate a large number of macromolecules. Why do you suppose that this is the case? 

Page 2 of 2 

