BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

Module 2: Study Guide Question 
Answers 

1. (A) [P]/[R] = 2 (>1), so G˚ = -RTln>1 = neg. number and favorable 
(B) [P]/[R] = 0.5 (<1), so G˚ = -RTln<1 = pos. number and unfavorable 
(C) the intrinsic difference between their relative free energies (Gs), if they are increasing or 
decreasing as the reactants become the products.  If they are increasing the reaction as 
written is unfavorable and requires coupling to another reaction that has a greater decrease 
in free energy to proceed as written.  If decreasing the reaction is favorable as written.  
Unfavorable reactions can potentially be driven by a high [P]/[R] concentration ratio. 
(D) You must also know the actual concentration of the reactants and products in the cell to 
determine the G of the reaction in the cell. 

2. 

3. (A) The second law of thermodynamics states that the universe tends toward randomness or 
disorder. 
(B) A small amount of cells is added to nutrient containing medium in a flask and grown in a 
calorimeter (box to measure change in heat, temperature) until there is a large amount of 
cells.   
(C) Nutrients (small molecules, less order) are taken up and used to synthesize the cells (larger 
molecules, whole cells, more order) while releasing heat into their surroundings (creating a 
large amount of disorder).  Thus, the cells create order to produce cell parts and more cells, 
but offset this increased order with greater disorder in their system (their universe). 

4. The hydrolysis of ATP to ADP, Pi and H+ (H2O is ignored since the concentration stays near 56 
M) is favorable  
(A) due to the G˚’ and RTlnK being negative values. 
(B) G˚’, an intrinsic property of this reaction, is quite negative due to the neutral pH inside the 
cell (so stays 10-7 M, pulling the reaction to the right). 

Page 1 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

(C) the concentration of ATP, a system property, is kept much higher than the concentration 
of ADP and Pi in the cell, so RTlnK (K = [ADP][Pi]/[ATP] = < 1, ln < 1 is a negative number.  We will 
get back to this later. 

5. (A) The first law of thermodynamics, energy is conserved in the universe, relates to enthalpy 
or H.  The second law of thermodynamics, the universe tends toward randomness or disorder 
relates to entropy or S. 
(B)  
(C)  
6. (A) G˚ = - RTlnKeq; Keq is the ratio of product (chamber B) to reactant (chamber A) at 
equilibrium (when the ratio stops changing).  As described above in the jumping bean 
analogy, this is a function of both enthalpy H, and entropy S.  A decrease in H and increase in 
S lead to more product than reactant at equilibrium, a decrease in G and a favorable 
reaction.  K is the actual ratio of product to reactant in the cell.  When the concentration of 
reactant (chamber A) is greater than the concentration of product (chamber B) then this 
system property contributes to a decrease in the free energy of the overall reaction. 
(B) the [products]/[reactants] or [ADP][Pi]/[ATP] in cells is << 1; at equilibrium it is >>1. 

(C)  

Page 2 of 6 

 
  
BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

K or Keq 

G˚ (Grxn = 0) 

Grxn (G˚ = 0) 

103 
101 
1 
10-1 
10-3 

-4.3 kcal/mole 
-1.4 kcal/mole 
0 
1.4 kcal/mole 
4.3 kcal/mole 

4.3 kcal/mole 
1.4 kcal/mole 
0 
-1.4 kcal/mole 
-4.3 kcal/mole 

7. (A) Thermodynamically unfavorable reactions have a positive Grxn, and so require energy 
input.  
(B) Cells usually “drive” an unfavorable reaction through coupling with a reaction, like ATP 
hydrolysis, that is energetically favorable (Grxn negative) enough to off-set or the positive 
Grxn of that reaction. 
(C) Synthesis of glutamine from glutamate and NH4+ (G˚ = +4 kcal/mole) is driven by coupling 
the reaction with ATP hydrolysis (G˚ = -7.3 kcal/mole) with a net G˚ = -3.3 kcal/mole, which is 
quite favorable.  Mechanistically, this is done on an enzyme the transfers the high energy 
gamma phosphate from ATP to glutamate forming phosphoglutamate.  The P-glutamate + 
NH4

+ → glutamine + Pi reaction is favorable (G˚ is negative). 

8. Since the dissolution reaction is spontaneous, the G must be negative.  Since the reaction 
absorbs heat, the H must be positive. Given G = H - TS, this is possible if the S is very large 
and positive, as one would expect for a solid dissolving. 

9.  Covalent bonds (50-250 kcal/mole, unaffected by water); Ionic bond (80 kcal/mole in a 
vacuum- 3-20 kcal/mole in water); Hydrogen bond (3-7 kcal/mole in vacuum- ≤1-3 kcal/mole 
in water); van der Waals bond (0.1-0.2 kcal/mole, unaffected by water). 

10. False.  Some single ionic bonds could be strong enough (up to 20 kcal/mole).  However, 
the answer is generally true.  A single non-covalent van der Waals attraction, many hydrogen 
bonds, and some ionic bonds (especially in water) are too weak to withstand the thermal 
motions that tend to knock/pull molecules apart.  Functioning singly, non-covalent bonds 
would not be sufficient to hold macromolecules together for a significant amount of time.  
Multiple H-bonds and ionic bonds will withstand the energy of collisions, etc. at room 
temperature. Therefore, this sort of interaction involves several non-covalent bonds. 

11.  Hydrophobic forces/interactions. Non-polar molecules cluster together to reduce the 
surface area exposed to the water.  For example, oil forms droplets in water and eventually 
separates into a separate phase.  Since non-polar (hydrophobic) groups and molecules 
cannot participate in H-bonding with water molecules, the surrounding water molecules are 
driven to interact more between themselves. This increased interaction stabilizes the crystal 
lattice structure of the water immediately surrounding the hydrophobic functional groups or 
molecules, forming an ice like water crystal lattice or “clathrate cage”.  This increased 
ordering of many water molecules decreases the entropy (“randomness”) of the system.  
Bringing together the hydrophobic molecules increases the entropy (+S) by decreasing the 
hydrophobic surface area, thus decreasing the amount of structured water. 

Page 3 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

12.  Van der Waals interactions 
- Weakest, require very close approach of atoms in molecules, no room for competition by 
H2O molecules, so their strength is unaffected by H2O or ions. 
- Involve forming induced dipoles in interacting atoms, are strongest at the balance point 
between repulsion between the electron clouds and attraction between the induced dipoles. 
Hydrogen bonds 
- Partly covalent, partly electrostatic due to H+ sharing/transfer between the proton donor and 
acceptor group (N or O atoms) 
- Have directionality, are affected by the alignment of the bond, the donor and acceptor 
groups have the strongest H-bond when at an 180˚ alignment. 
- Functional groups that form H-bonds are polar, so they H-bond with water, so water 
competes with and weakens H-bonds. 
Ionic bonds 
- Purely charge-charge or electrostatic interactions 
- Are not directional 
- Their strength is described quantitatively by Coulombs’s law, which has terms for the strength 
of the positive or negative charges of the interacting functional groups, their distance from 
each other and the dielectric constant of the solvent/solution (a measure of its ability to 
compete with the two groups for interacting). 
- Are strongly competed for or weakened by water (Dielectric constant of 80). 
Hydrophobic forces/interactions 
- Hydrophobic functional groups, for example hydrocarbons, do not interact with water to 
form hydrogen bonds 
- The water molecules must interact with each other in the vicinity to satisfy their tendency to 
form H-bonds forming an ordered crystal lattice, decrease the enthalpy and the free energy 
of the system.  The association of hydrophobic functional groups minimizes the surface area 
interacting with the water solvent, decreasing the order (increasing the enthalpy and free 
energy) of the system. 
- Hydrophobic forces do not exist in the absence of water, so they are not weakened by 
water, rather they are dependent on it. 

13.  Ethanol can form hydrogen bonds with water molecules, but ethane cannot.  When 
ethanol dissolves, the decrease in the system's entropy that results from formation of ordered 
– group is partly compensated by the favorable interactions 
arrays of water around the CH3CH2
(hydrogen bonds) of the hydroxyl group of ethanol with water molecules.  Ethane cannot form 
such hydrogen bonds. 

14.  For each of the pairs below, the conjugate base (proton acceptor group): 

1b. RCOO– 

2a. RNH2 

3a. H2PO4

– 

Page 4 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

4b. HCO3

– 

15.  Phosphoric acid (H3PO4) has three dissociable protons, with the pKa’s shown below.  The 
form of phosphoric acid that predominates in a solution at pH 4 is H2PO4
phosphoric acid will reach pH 4 after addition of approximately one equivalent of OH- and will 
be close to half way between the first and second pKa.  At pH 4 essentially all of the first 
proton on phosphoric acid will have dissociated but nearly none of the second proton will 
have begun to dissociate.  I suggest you practice plotting this out on a pH versus –OH 
equivalents graph. 
Acid 
H3PO4   
–  
H2PO4
2–  
HPO4

pKa 
2.14 
6.86 
12.4 

–.  A solution of 

16. (1) pKa = –log Ka;   
(2) See Fig. 2-17, p. 59; pKa is the value of pH at the inflection point in a plot of pH vs. extent of 
titration of the weak acid.  At the pKa, the concentration of ionized acid equals the 
concentration of un-ionized acid. 

17.  1.  All amino acids found in naturally occurring 
proteins have an  carbon to which are attached a 
carboxylic acid, an amine, a hydrogen, and a 
variable side chain. 

18.  The three main classes are polar, nonpolar, and special amino acids.  Since all amino 
acids have the same structure except for their R-groups, it is the R-group that determines how 
each amino acid is classified.  Glutamate and lysine are negatively and positively charged 
polar amino acids, respectively.  Serine is an uncharged polar amino acid.  Leucine is a 
nonpolar amino acid.  Proline is a special amino acid.  See Lecture 8 PowerPoint slides for 
details.  In your textbook the amino acids are subdivide further and slightly differently into 
nonpolar aliphatic and aromatic, polar uncharged, negatively charged and positively 
charged (page 75 Figure 3-5). 

19.  Most amino acids are soluble in water due to having at least two polar, charged 
functional groups; the amino group and the carboxyl group.  Amino acids have at least one 
weak base and one weak acid functional group, the amino group and the carboxyl group.  
Some amino acids have a third functional group, the R group that is a weak acid or a weak 
base (see page 75 Figure 3-5, positively and negatively charged R groups).  Glycine has a net 
charge of – 1 at pH 11 and above (see page 79 Figure 3-10).  The net charge of any amino 
acid at its pI is 0.  The pKa of the amino and carboxyl groups are similar (~9-10 and ~ 2, 

Page 5 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BC 351: Principles of Biochemistry 

respectively, see page 73 Table 3-1), but do vary due to the effects of electronegative atoms 
on their R groups (see page 80 Figure 3-11), so no they are not all the same. 

20.  Aspartate has a polar (hydrophilic) side chain, which forms hydrogen bonds with water.  In 
contrast, phenylalanine has a nonpolar (hydrophobic) side chain. (See Fig. 3-5, p. 79 for 
structures.) 

21.  The pKa of the histidine side chain is 6.0. 

a. The R group pKa = 6.0 

b. The COOH pKa = 1.8 and the +NH3 pKa = 9.2 

c. More than half 

d. The overall net charge will equal 0.  

e. The correct diagram is mod2_Q21e_B.png 

f. The correct diagram is mod2_Q21f_A.png 

Page 6 of 6 

